.TH netsnmp 1 "2025-09-20" "2.0.0" "NetSnmp User Manual"

.SH NAME
netsnmp \- A fast and efficient network device discovery tool

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B netsnmp
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIPATTERN\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B netsnmp
is a command-line tool designed to discover and inventory network devices using ICMP and SNMP protocols. It scans specified networks, queries devices for their hostname and serial number, and maintains a local cache for quick searching. The tool is optimized for performance and stealth, using \fBfping\fR for efficient host discovery and parallel processing for SNMP queries.

.SH CORE COMMANDS
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-update
Performs a full scan of the networks defined in the configuration file. This command rebuilds the cache from scratch, removing any entries for devices that are no longer found. This is the primary command for populating the device database.
.TP
.BR \-\-update-incremental
Performs an incremental scan. This command discovers devices and either adds them to the cache if they are new or updates their information if they already exist. Unlike a full update, it does not remove devices that are not found, preserving the cache history of temporarily offline devices.
.TP
.BR [PATTERN]
If no other options are specified, the first argument is treated as a case-insensitive search pattern. \fBnetsnmp\fR will search its cache for any device whose IP address, hostname, or serial number contains the pattern. If no pattern is given, all devices in the cache are listed.

.SH CACHE MANAGEMENT
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-info
Displays statistics about the device cache, including the file location, total number of hosts, file size, last modification time, and whether the cache is considered stale based on the configured TTL.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-clear
Permanently deletes the device cache files. The cache will be empty until the next scan is run.

.SH CONFIGURATION & UTILITIES
.TP
.BR \-\-config
Displays the current configuration that \fBnetsnmp\fR is using, including all parameters loaded from the configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-\-wizard
Starts an interactive configuration wizard that prompts the user for the most common settings (networks and SNMP communities) and saves them to the configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Displays a brief help message summarizing the available commands and options.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enables verbose output, which provides more detailed step-by-step information about the tool's operations during a scan.
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Prints the version of the \fBnetsnmp\fR tool.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The following options are provided to help diagnose issues with configuration or network connectivity.
.TP
.BR \-\-test-scan
Runs a quick self-check to verify that essential dependencies like \fBsnmpget\fR and \fBfping\fR are installed and that the current configuration is valid.
.TP
.BR \-\-test-snmp " \fIIP_ADDRESS\fR"
Performs a direct SNMP query against a single target IP address using the configured communities. This is useful for confirming that a specific device is reachable and responding to SNMP.
.TP
.BR \-\-test-ips " \fINETWORK\fR"
Generates and prints the full list of IP addresses for a given network string (e.g., 192.168.1.0/24 or 10.0.0.1-50). This helps verify that network definitions are being parsed correctly.

.SH NETWORK FORMATS
\fBnetsnmp\fR accepts the following formats in its configuration or command-line arguments:
.TP
.B CIDR Notation
192.168.1.0/24 (scans .1 through .254)
.TP
.B IP Ranges
10.0.0.1-100 (scans from .1 to .100 inclusive)
.TP
.B Single IP
172.16.30.5 (scans only this IP)

.SH FILES
.TP
.B /etc/netsnmp/netsnmp.conf
System-wide configuration file (used when run as root).
.TP
.B ~/.config/netsnmp/netsnmp.conf
User-specific configuration file. Overrides the system-wide file if it exists.
.TP
.B /var/cache/netsnmp/hosts.cache
System-wide device cache file.
.TP
.B ~/.cache/netsnmp/hosts.cache
User-specific device cache file.
.TP
.B /var/log/netsnmp.log
System-wide log file.
.TP
.B ~/.cache/netsnmp.log
User-specific log file.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B netsnmp --update
Scan the network and build the cache.
.TP
.B netsnmp cisco-switch-3F
Search for a device with "cisco-switch-3F" in its name.
.TP
.B netsnmp 10.40.2.25
Find the device with the specified IP address.
.TP
.B netsnmp --info
Check the status of the local cache.

.SH AUTHOR
Kikandi Safari Isaac

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fping (8),
.BR snmpget (1),
.BR snmp.conf (5)